---
layout: default
title: Letter to President-Elect Obama
category: blog
description: Letter to Obama from Cheng Xu
author: cheng
byline: true
date: 2008-12-20
---

<div class="row">
<div class="col-md-8" markdown="1">

I write this letter with little hope
that it will reach anyone of significant influence to affect the changes that I
deem to be of the utmost urgency and importance. However, your election has
energized the youth base to take a proactive role in trying to make a
difference in the world, and as part of that group, I am writing this letter to
offer my point of view in my field of study, so you may have a variety of
different ideas that you have publicly claimed to seek.

On
your campaign trail, you implied a multi-faceted approach to tackling the
energy problem and nuclear energy will be a part of the solution. Personally, I
have arrived at that approach fairly early in my studies and finally choose to
study in the field of nuclear engineering as my own contribution to solve the
global energy problem. I am by no means an expert in my field yet and I am sure
you are already fairly well informed about the problems we face. But I will
still like to offer you my own view on what I think would be a sustainable
energy policy and what directions we should head in as a country as a whole. I
believe a comprehensive scientific perspective might offer a new way of looking
at things that politicians might not be so familiar with.

Generally, we can separate power consumption into three categories
by the nature of its usage. The first is power consumed by transportation. The
main fuel for that economy is oil, and the lack of it is causing political
tension, wars, and the collapse of the American auto industry. The second is
power consumed by everyday citizens in their everyday lives at home. The third
is power consumed by industry which drives the American economy.  As of now,
the major source of power for private consumption and industry consumption is
supplied from the same source, electricity generated by power plants: including
coal plants, hydroelectric dams, and nuclear power plants. When we say we want
to achieve sustainable energy and energy dependence, we need to consider
problems for each category individually and find replacements that make sense
for each.

The replacement fuel for transportation consumption
is already well underway. Electric cars are already slowly becoming practical
and hydrogen fuel cells are under intense development. However, switching from
fossil fuel to electric only serves to put more power demand burden on the
power plants. The electricity and hydrogen has to be generated from somewhere,
and that somewhere falls right back to the power industry. If we continue to
generate electricity using coal plants with the additional demand from electric
cars, then we will simply increase the release of green house gas and further
global warming. The potential replacements for coal are many, but each has
their shortcomings, therefore we must pursue every solution accordingly.

In order to successfully battle global warming, we need a source of
energy that is versatile enough to be implemented anywhere fossil fuel is
currently operating and it has to be technology we currently have, because we
can’t afford to wait. Hydroelectric and geothermal plants all need specific
geological conditions for them to be a truly viable form of energy. They should
be built where they can be built, but they can’t completely replace fossil fuel
due to their inherent limits. Building dams also has severe impacts on rivers,
and further research is needed to minimize environmental damage. Clean coal is
not a technology that we already have that can be implemented in time to curb
emissions. That leaves only solar, wind, and nuclear energy.

I think we all agree that solar power, and wind power are the truly
sustainable energy generation methods that we should all pursue. However, there
are limitations to their application. They all have energy efficiency limits
and more importantly, their power density is not comparable to those of fossil
fuel. That means to get the same amount of power output, they will need much
more land to achieve what fossil fuel did. For example, they are planning to
build a solar power plant in Arizona in 2011, it will generate 280MW of power
for 70000 homes, but it will take 1900 acres, or equivalently 7.6 million
square meters.  This kind of power generation might work in the fields of
Arizona, but it will not work in densely populated areas, nor will it work in
developing countries such as China or India to be effective in battling
emissions.

What does work however, is small scale power
generation from solar and wind power on a commercial level.  Wind and solar
power is specially suited for the second category of power consumption I have
described above. The technology is there for each individual family to install
solar panels or even a small wind turbine to generate electricity, making them
independent from power companies for electricity in their own home. The main
obstacle against their implementation is economical. People don’t do it simply
because they do not think it’s worth the money, and there are few companies in
the solar industry because they don’t have the demand. That is a problem that
will be easily fixed by government subsidies and incentives. New companies that
build solar panels and wind turbines on a large scale will also create the jobs
that we will need in this recession. The push for solar and power should not be
aimed at big power plants, but individual companies that will transform every
rooftop into their own sustainable power generator.

Now that
we have theoretically taken care of the second category, we are still left with
the power consumption of industry, including the transportation industry. There
is no way a factory will generate enough power it needs for operation by
littering its rooftops with solar panels (although they should for backup and
auxiliary power). Only nuclear power has the necessary power density and
versatility to completely replace fossil fuel as an alternative emission free
source to drive progress in industry. With the next generation nuclear power
plants designed, they can achieve 600MW of thermal power in a building as small
as 3600 square meters; that is a power density thousands of times better than
solar and wind power.  Of course, there are downsides to everything and I am
sure you are well aware of the shortcomings of nuclear power.

You have said you are willing to consider nuclear power, if it is
safe. Although I may be biased because I am studying the field, but I do
believe that over the past 50 years that nuclear power plants have been
operating, there are only two major nuclear power plant mishaps; and the one
that happened in Three Miles Island caused no direct deaths. Nuclear power also
has a much higher safety factor in every one of its components than similar
components for conventional power plants, and rightly so. However, despite its
record and strict regulations, people are still not convinced that nuclear
power is safe. I believe this irrational fear is two-fold and could be remedied
if people were appropriately educated about nuclear power with the support of
government and environmental agencies.

Firstly, people have
an irrational fear of the word “radiation”. We can see that from the standard
imposed upon Yucca Mountain proposal. The proposal wants a nuclear fuel storage
facility to have no more than 15 mRem of radiation per year.  To put this in
perspective, the normal background radiation we are exposed to as everyday
people is 360 mRem per year. Every time we take an international flight, we are
exposed to an extra 5 mRem. To expect a facility, that is suppose to house all
the used radioactive fuel in the country to emit radiation that is less than 3
international flights per year, puts unreasonable expectations on those
designing and building the facility. However, the congress expects it, and the
people who voted for the congress expect it. It is exactly this type of
mentality that pushes reasonable judgment aside out of fear, and kept the
nuclear power industry in dead water for the past fifty years. This irrational
fear may be fixed if only people and politicians were educated and provided
with the accurate information about the nuclear power industry.

The other aspect of the fear is the same kind that keeps people from
flying. Even though more people are killed in car accidents every year than
airplane crashes, the magnitude of a potential disaster is enough for people to
say no to a safer option and chose a more dangerous one. This phenomenon is
happening to the nuclear power industry and we simply need to overlook this
irrational fear and get into the cabin. Just as we can’t simply drive across
the Pacific Ocean, we also can’t fix global warming without nuclear power.

The only real aspect of concern against nuclear
power is nuclear proliferation. In that regard, the government is especially
important in providing the safety aspect with its political and diplomatic
powers. The industrial design of every nuclear power plants takes into account
the number of guards needed and provides a difficult route to access
potentially dangerous material. However, there is only so much the industry can
do to deter potential terrorists and the responsibility falls upon the
government to make sure we will not be the target of a nuclear attack. DOE’s
GNEP program is a good first step towards developing a way to battle
non-proliferation and the nuclear engineering industry will never stop to
search for better ways to provide national security.

I believe I have described a general overview of what I deem to be a viable way
to achieve the kind of sustainable energy policy we need. It consists of
nuclear power plants providing the electricity for industry and transportation
while solar panels and wind turbines will pick up the slack on the family
level.  However, nuclear fission plants are by no means a sustainable fuel
alternative. If demand keeps on rising as the rate it is now, the world supply
of uranium will run out in 100 years if we replace all coal plants with nuclear
plants. A truly sustainable energy will be nuclear fusion, that takes water as
fuel and generate nothing but helium. Although international effort is underway
to build ITER and DEMO fusion generators, this is still a technology we still
need to research for 50 to 60 more years. In an idealized world, we would
completely stop development of nuclear fission plants and pour all our money
into fusion research. However, we do not have 50 to 60 years to waste and need
a solution to replace fossil fuel now. Nuclear fission power plants are the
only bridge that we have in order to achieve a sustainable world, and I hope
your policies will reflect the urgency for an energy solution you have so
eloquently spoke of.

Have a wonderful presidency, the whole world is watching.

_Cheng Xu is a graduate student at the University of Michigan working on nuclear
materials._

</div>
</div>
