---
layout: news
title: "Fermi 1 breeder reactor booklet from 1960: Atomic Power for Peace and Prosperity"
author: nick
categorys: news
tags: museum
description: >
  A digitized booklet describing the non-profit companies formed
  to design, build, and operate the Fermi 1 sodium-cooled breeder
  reactor near Detroit.
byline: true
image: /img/fermi-booklet-cover.jpg
comments: true
---

<div class="row">
<div class="col" markdown="1">

Here is a 1960 booklet describing the Fermi 1 liquid metal fast breeder reactor
near Detroit. Direct link
[here](https://archive.org/details/atomic-power-for-peace-and-prosperity-fermi-1-booklet-1960).

<div class="ifcontainer">
<iframe
  src="https://archive.org/details/atomic-power-for-peace-and-prosperity-fermi-1-booklet-1960"
  class="responsive-iframe"
  frameborder="0"
  webkitallowfullscreen="true"
  mozallowfullscreen="true"
  allowfullscreen
></iframe>
</div>

The booklet starts out explaining that energy is a keystone of prosperity, and
that power demand was expected to double by 1980 (just 20 years). As fossil fuel
runs out, the newly discovered atomic fuels can satisfy this growth. A pound of
uranium or thorium can produce 3,500,000 kWh of electricity, whereas a pound of
coal only produced 1.5 kWh.

The Atomic Power Development Associates, Inc. (APDA) was a non-profit corporation
formed by 30 electric power companies and 12 engineering and manufacturing firms
that shared expensive research, experimentation, and development work going into
the basic design of the fast breeder power reactor.

When the Atomic Energy Commission announced its first round Power Demonstration
Reactor Program (PDRP), a proposal for Fermi 1 was filed by a group of 9 companies
who organized another non-profit, the Power Reactor Development Company (PRDC).

The PRDC membership grew to 18 electric companies and 7 manufacturing firms. Its
mission was to finance, construct, own, and operate an APDA-designed
developmental power reactor to advanced atomic power development.

These groups were focused on breeder reactors because only they can make
effective use of all nuclear materials, rather than only the fuels enriched with
the costly isotope U-235. The booklet explains the concept of breeders well, without
referring to the paradoxical 'makes more fuel than it consumes' trope.

Fermi 1 was financed entirely with private funds, with costs estimated at $42M.
The AEC provided $4.45M of R&D support, including the running of a critical
experiment. The PDRC planned to sell steam to Detroit Edison for the production
of electricity.

The conventional 150 MWe steam-turbine side of the facility was owned and
operated by Detroit Edison, and was estimated to cost $17M.

Fermi 1 was a 2nd-generation sodium-cooled fast reactor, building on the
experience of the EBR-1, SIR, and Seawolf sodium-cooled systems.

After completion, Fermi 1 struggled during startup testing, and even melted fuel
in an incident that has was immortalized by the "We almost lost Detroit"
franchise. (See also: ["We did not almost lose
Detroit](https://michiganintheworld.history.lsa.umich.edu/environmentalism/items/show/104#?c=0&m=0&s=0&cv=0))

Nevertheless, lessons and experience from Fermi 1 echo throughout the ages.
Thousands of pages of design information, construction experience, and
operational experience exist for us to use today. The 'non-profit consortium'
model of nuclear development succeeded yet again

The booklet contains some progress photos of the construction of Fermi-1 as well.

# See Also

- [Fermi 1 Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermi_1)
- [Our Digital Museum]({% link museum.md %})

</div>
</div>
