---
layout: news
title: >
  A nuclear startup will probably not be the next SpaceX
author: echaleff
subtitle: Guest post
categories:
  - news
tags: videos
description: >
  For the last decade in nuclear, it’s been in vogue to make comparisons to
  SpaceX. It’s understandable why: In 2008, launch services were a stilted
  industry, funded almost entirely by governments and dominated by massive
  companies operating under cost-plus contracts. In short order, they were
  disrupted by an upstart, leading to radical price cuts and performance
  improvements. Who wouldn’t want to replicate that in the nuclear industry?
byline: true
image: /img/nuclear-space-launch.png
comments: true
---

<div class="row">
<div class="col-md-8" markdown="1">

<img src="/img/ethan_chaleff.jpg" class="rounded img-fluid w-25 float-end" alt="Headshot
of Ethan Chaleff." {% imagesize img/ethan_chaleff.jpg:props %} />

_This article represents my personal views of opinions and not those of my
employer._

For the last decade in nuclear, it’s been in vogue to make comparisons to
SpaceX. It’s understandable why: In 2008, launch services were a stilted
industry, funded almost entirely by governments and dominated by massive
companies operating under cost-plus contracts. In short order, they were
disrupted by an upstart, leading to radical price cuts and performance
improvements. Who wouldn’t want to replicate that in the nuclear industry?

By all means, there are improvements to be made in the nuclear industry, and I’m
all for challenging the status quo. But for all the SpaceX/Nuclear fanfiction
out there, I haven’t seen a thoughtful explanation of some of the fundamental
differences between the nuclear industry today and the space launch industry as
it was in 2008. As someone who was closely involved with several nuclear
startups, has a background in aerospace engineering, worked with NASA on nuclear
propulsion, and now works at a company building and maintaining reactors
worldwide, I was inspired to to use my free time helping people understand
something.(Shoutout to Nick Touran for inspiration).

Unquestionably, radiation hazard (and public fear of radiation hazards) is a key
difference between reactors and rockets; that said, I’m not going to address
that below since if this topic is broached at all, that's usually the only thing
covered. From a “pure” technology development perspective, there are three other
significant differences between developing a launch vehicle and a nuclear power
plant:

The timeline to evaluate success for nuclear reactors is decades not minutes.
Electricity is already a commodity market with robust competition, launch
services was not. Nuclear deployment cannot vertically integrate at useful
scale, while SpaceX could.

## Timeline to innovate

The fourth flight of Falcon 1 launched at 23:15 UTC on September 28, 2008. About
9 minutes later its payload was in orbit and the mission could be legitimately
claimed a success. Each implementation (especially the ones that never made it
to the launch pad) could be fully evaluated over its entire lifecycle within a
number of months. “Did it work,” and “how much did it cost” were answerable
questions.

In contrast, nuclear reactors are investments with high upfront capital cost and
(ideally) low operating costs. To result in a positive return on investment,
they don’t just have to work, they have to work, and work reliably, for decades.
The first commercial Pressurized Water Reactors were built with Alloy 600 steam
generators. The alloy was used for a range of plants built starting in the late
1950’s through the early 1970’s. In 1971, a German nuclear plant first
identified a phenomena known as stress corrosion cracking (SCC) which could lead
to undetectable cracks in hard to access areas. Over the next two decades, a
range of chemistry, alloy, and material control processes were developed to
alleviate SCC, but many plants had to be retrofitted, costing billions of
dollars and resulting in lengthy outages. San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station
had a botched steam generator replacement which eventually contributed to the
shutdown of the multi-billion dollar reactor after the billion dollar retrofit
to fix SCC issues.

When each iteration of a nuclear plant can take years and hundreds of millions
or billions of dollars, and each unit is expected to operate for decades, you
simply can’t get to the same level of confidence with rapid testing. How much do
you want to invest before you know what the long-term operating performance is?
While non-nuclear testing has value, the non-nuclear parts of water reactors
were figured out on coal plants by the 1950's (seriously, they haven’t changed
that much). It still took decades before nuclear costs truly came down to the
level to compete with other electricity sources as maintenance and operating
issues were resolved.

Said another way, given the long lifecycle of reactors, the information you get
from a multiple-month reactor test is similar to building a rocket, putting it
on the launch pad, taking it down after the photo op, and calling that a
success.

## Electricity markets don’t have juicy margins

A second thing I see overlooked is what competitive market forces exist within
the nuclear industry, compared to those in launch services.

In the early 2000’s there were essentially four launch vehicle providers, (and
really only one in the US after Boeing and Lockheed formed ULA). Similarly,
there were an equally small number of customers, mostly governments. If you
wanted to get a satellite to space, you had to buy a launch vehicle, and you had
to buy it from those providers. Because so few commercial customers could afford
the exorbitant launch costs, there wasn’t that much market pressure to innovate,
and government cost-plus contracts provided little incentive to improve the
underlying technology. This situation left massive margins if someone could even
modestly reduce costs. As launch costs came down, newly profitable markets
opened, significantly expanding the addressable market that SpaceX was the
cheapest provider for.

Compare that to electricity: almost everyone buys electricity, and they do so
from a technologically, geographically, and organizationally diverse group of
producers. While AI and crypto-currency drive more aggressive load growth
projections, few expect the electricity market to grow by an order of magnitude
even in the most optimistic situations. Some customers might pay a premium for
nuclear (northern Alaskan towns and military bases for the reliability or a tech
company for low carbon). But for pretty much everyone else, electricity is like
gasoline: as long as it works, you don't care where it's from, and you just want
it to be cheap. So while nuclear innovators can try to disrupt the nuclear
industry, they are competing within a mature electricity industry.

When SpaceX made even a little better launch vehicle, they could beat everyone
on cost and rapidly gain market share while simultaneously expanding the market.
Making a little better nuclear plant won't win the electricity market; it will
just put you in the same fierce competition as everyone else, where margins are
already razor thin and a diverse marketplace of technologies has been cutting
costs for decades.

## Vertical Integration of infrastructure is different from equipment

A final point concerns the ability to vertically integrate nuclear power plants.
Many well-funded startups aim to replicate SpaceX's vertical integration
strategy and reap the cost and performance benefits. SpaceX could control cost
and performance throughout the supply chain by bringing it in house, wresting
design and price control from suppliers and contractors. In addition to having
the capital and willingness to invest, one of the logistical reasons SpaceX
could do this at all was they could literally bring rocket components into the
house (or at least an assembly building). Even the largest components of each
Falcon 9 can be shipped by truck, allowing manufacturing, transport, and
delivery to happen in controlled, centralized locations from a finite number of
suppliers. The fully integrated rocket is launched from where it is built [or
can be transported](https://images.app.goo.gl/eWtgkkmrgPM7x29m7), allowing final
integration to occur in a similarly controlled, consistent location.

Building a nuclear plant is a much bigger endeavor by a few orders magnitude.
Each reactor must be integrated and operated in the same region it is used.
While reactor vessels and other equipment for even GW-scale reactors [can be
readily shipped by truck or rail](https://images.app.goo.gl/rBySAH1JTTAZrd4A9),
most of the cost of building a nuclear plant is infrastructure-scale
construction. Even the [2 MW reactors built by the Army in the
1960’s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4NH2AUAnzf8) had sizeable earthworks,
concrete shielding, control buildings, switchyards, cooling systems etc. Yes, if
you can really shrink reactors down to where they fit on a truck (and
concurrently figure out how to dramatically reduce the cost of fuel, site prep,
construction, licensing, disposal, security, inspection, and maintenance) then
building a thousand 1 MW reactors might be cheaper than building one 1 GW one.
In that case, you can vertically integrate in the SpaceX model. But at least in
the [1960’s when we tried, that didn’t pan
out](https://www.usace.army.mil/About/History/Exhibits/Nuclear-Power-Program/).

For infrastructure-scale reactors, it is nearly impossible to vertically
integrate the majority of your cost centers, and few utilities want to sign over
their billion dollar project to an Architect-Engineer and EPC firms they don’t
know, especially when that AE and EPC also has no experience with local
construction contractors, providers, laws, or logistics. This situation can be
improved relative to prior approaches, but the reality remains that few
companies have the capital to fully integrate.

## Shin Kori 4 makes a better poster than Falcon 9

There is a lot the nuclear industry can learn from other highly technical,
integrated systems design challenges, including launch vehicles, but also
medical devices, automotive, and defense. We need to be rigorous about
questioning whether “the nuclear way” is the only way. Along those lines, while
testing and vertical integration cannot address all problems, that also doesn’t
mean it is a waste of time; the nuclear industry in the US has not seen any new
integrated system development and deployment since the 1970s; designing new
systems is fundamentally different from maintaining or modifying existing ones
and its a skill we need to foster. Testing provides real world data that can cut
off endless design-analysis loops.

Still, I’d prefer the nuclear industry spend at least as much time looking at
the successful nuclear buildouts in France, South Korea, and Japan as they do
successful design in different industries. Those countries applied standard
designs with the same utility, AE, EPC and regulator, to great effect. If we
want to hang a poster on the wall, perhaps it should be of South Korea's Shin
Kori Unit 4, built in 2015 for approximately [$2,900/kW in 2025
dollars](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421516300106)
(though certainly caveats are needed on the cost).

If we could build a nuclear plant in the US today at that cost, [it would be
cheaper to write off a brand new combined cycle natural gas plant, scrap it, and
build that nuclear
plant](https://research.google/pubs/analyzing-energy-technologies-and-policies-using-doscoe/).

I think that’s cooler than landing a first stage.

_This article first appeared
[here](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/nuclear-startup-probably-next-spacex-ethan-s-chaleff-phd-x9huc/?trackingId=DOfxk45FYvWRlf5EXDsw9Q%3D%3D)
and was hosted here with permission from the author for ease of access for non-LinkedIn users._

<img src="{{ page.image }}" class="rounded w-75" alt="Nuclear reactor
and space launch."  />

</div>
</div>
